Modify rule S6458: LaYC format (#2557)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6458/cfamily/rule.adoc

This enables the creation of a perfect forwarding constructor for wrapper types: the constructor arguments are forwarded to build the underlying type:
[source,cpp]
----
class Wrapper {
public:
  // A defaulted copy constructor
  Wrapper(Wrapper const& other) = default;

  template <typename T>
  Wrapper(T&& str)  // A noncompliant forwarding constructor
    : str(std::forward<T>(str)) {}

private:
  std::string str;
};
----

However, this constructor is too greedy: overload resolution prefers it over the copy constructor as soon as the argument type is slightly different from a `Wrapper const&`.
For instance, when passing a non-const _lvalue_ (`w` in the following example), calling the copy constructor requires a non-const to const conversion, while the forwarding reference parameter is an exact match,
and will therefore be selected. This is usually not the expected behavior.

[source,cpp]
----
Wrapper w("str1");
Wrapper const cw("str2");

Wrapper w2(cw);  // Ok: calls Wrapper(Wrapper const& other)

> Wrapper w3(s);   // Ill-formed: calls Wrapper(T&& str) with T = Wrapper&

Author: Good catch :smile:

I addressed that in 5dba9cd81f27094e373d4ecef20596cf9fd2af35. Note that I slightly changed the suggested wording to make it fit into one line, let me know what you think about it... :smile:

> Wrapper w3(s);   // Ill-formed: calls Wrapper(T&& str) with T = Wrapper&

Reviewer: Looks great!

----

It can be argued that the greediness of forwarding references is a general problem. However, this rule specifically targets constructors
that can be called with a single argument of _forwarding reference_ type. This is because in such cases, they can compete with copy or move

> constructors including those that are implicitly generated by the compiler.

Reviewer: Makes sense. 👍

[source,cpp]
----
class Wrapper {
public:
  template <typename T>
  Wrapper(T&& str)  // Noncompliant: competes with compiler-generated copy constructor
    : str(std::forward<T>(str)) {}

private:
  std::string str;
};
----

==== Compliant solution

We fix the problem by adding a constraint to our forwarding constructor. This enables the copy constructor to receive calls again by
excluding the forwarding constructor when the deduced `T` is `Wrapper` (after discarding references and const-volatile qualifiers).

[source,cpp]
----
class Wrapper {
public:
  template <typename T>
  requires (!std::same_as<Wrapper, std::remove_cvref_t<T>>)
  Wrapper(T&& str)  // Compliant: no longer competes with the copy constructor
    : str(std::forward<T>(str)) {}

private:
  std::string str;
};
----

If {cpp}20 is not available yet, we can use `std::enable_if` instead of concepts. We also can not use `std::remove_cvref_t`, and we have to
be more verbose:

[source,cpp]
----
class Wrapper {
public:
  template <typename T,
      typename std::enable_if<
      !std::is_same<
        Wrapper, 
        typename std::remove_cv<typename std::remove_reference<T>::type>::type
      >::value, 

>       int>::type /* Unnamed */ = 0>

Reviewer: Looks good. And thanks for sharing this info.

    : value(std::forward<U>(u))
  {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

The problem with this constraint is that it depends on how the type `T` can be constructed; For example, it can yield unexpected results if
`T` itself has a forwarding constructor.

==== Compliant solution

In order to properly make our `TemplateWrapper` generic, we need to add the necessary constraint alongside `std::constructible_from`:

[source,cpp]
----
template<typename T>
class TemplateWrapper {
public:
  TemplateWrapper(TemplateWrapper const& other) : value(other.value) {}
   
  template<typename U>
    requires (!std::derived_from<std::remove_cvref_t<U>, TemplateWrapper>) && std::constructible_from<T, U>
  TemplateWrapper(U&& u)  // Compliant: properly constrained regardless of how T can be constructed
    : value(std::forward<U>(u))
  {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

Using `std::derived_from` instead of `std::same_as` is only meant for demonstration purposes here. `std::derived_from` is necessary only if
`TemplateWrapper` has derived classes, to ensure that the copy constructors of these derived classes don't end up calling the forwarding

> constructor.

Reviewer: > only meant for demonstration purposes here

I think it is fine not to go into more detail -- we would need a full blog post to explain this properly.
At the same time, I feel this whole point about inheritance deserves the attention of some of our users. What do you think about moving this example to the "Going the extra mile" section? I would structure it a bit differently, like so (very rough sentences, please adjust):

---

### Going the extra mile

One has to be careful when inheritance is involved to preserve the usual slicing semantics: the forwarding constructor should be further constrained with `!std::derived_from`:

    code example

Eric Niebler explains this in further detail in [Universal References and the Copy Constructor](https://ericniebler.com/2013/08/07/universal-references-and-the-copy-constructo/).

---

What do you think?

Author: This is a great idea. I had some hard time thinking of where to properly explain this, and adding another example just for that felt unnecessary. The "Going the extra mile" section sounds relevant. I made an attempt in 8d8588399e52e153ead85f1f1e53fd99eff6e4b3.

Thanks for sharing! :bow:

Reviewer: Nicely done!

  {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

Using `std::derived_from` instead of `std::same_as` is only meant for demonstration purposes here. `std::derived_from` is necessary only if
`TemplateWrapper` has derived classes, to ensure that the copy constructors of these derived classes don't end up calling the forwarding
constructor. This is explained in more detail in the "Going the extra mile" section below.

==== Noncompliant code example

In this noncompliant example, the forwarding constructor accepts a parameter pack and uses it to initialize the wrapped type. This can
still compete with the copy constructor when called with a single argument. Using `std::constructible_from` is not sufficient for the same
reasons as the previous example.

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
template<typename T>
class EmplaceWrapper {
public:
  EmplaceWrapper(EmplaceWrapper const& other) = default;

  template<typename... Args>
    requires std::constructible_from<T, Args...>
  EmplaceWrapper(Args&&... args) // Noncompliant: will compete with copy-constructor
    : value(std::forward<Args>(args)...)
  {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

==== Compliant solution

> In this case, we can use a type tag to allow the user to explicitly choose the emplace constructor. This approach is simpler to implement
> and offers greater flexibility. It is the same approach used by many wrapper types in the standard library, such as `std::optional` and
> `std::expected`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we can use a type tag to allow the user to explicitly choose the emplace constructor.
This approach is simpler to implement and offers greater flexibility.
It is the same approach used by many wrapper types in the standard library,
such as https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional/optional[`std::optional`]
and https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/expected/expected[`std::expected`].
```

> == Why is this an issue?

Reviewer: Something that I find missing in this section is: what is the consequence of this issue?

In a nutshell, I'd say something along these lines: even if the code compiles now, introducing another template instantiation later could result in a compile-time error that is hard to understand and debug.

Author: Totally true, I made an attempt in 2f591ae8502f924a122047db02c3e40803d12fab.

> _Forwarding references_ (also known as _universal references_) provide the ability to write a template that can deduce and accept any kind of reference to the object (_rvalue_/_lvalue_ _mutable_/_const_).

Author: Do you mean providing the syntax for a regular wrapper function that uses `std::forward`? If this is the case, I wouldn't agree because adding something like:

```cpp
template <typename T>
void func_wrapper(T&& arg) {
   // Note that arg is an lvalue here.
   // conditionally move arg, depending on whether the caller of func_wrapper provided an lvalue or an rvalue.
   func(std::forward<T>(arg));
}
```
I think such a snippet would distract a user who is already familiar with forwarding references from quickly understanding the issue the rule is trying to address. Also, we have many rules about forwarding references, such information might be a good candidate for some shared content, but I wouldn't place such information in the opening paragraph, because I would like the first few lines to be sufficient to give the necessary context for a user who is already familiar with the concepts. WDYT?

Not sure if I misinterpreted your suggestion, sorry if this were the case :smile:

This enables the creation of a perfect forwarding constructor for wrapper types, which allows a wrapper to forward its constructor arguments into the initializer of the underlying type:
[source,cpp]
----

> template<typename T>

Author: This is a very good point. I somehow overlooked this possibility. Fixed in 0bd382de66ce3076e5ff8b08a3691a3d0f1a9d95.

};
----

However, this constructor is too greedy: overload resolution prefers it over the copy constructor as soon as the argument type is slightly different from a `const Wrapper&`.
For instance, when passing a non-const _lvalue_, calling the copy constructor requires a benign non-const to const conversion, while the forwarding reference parameter is an exact match,
and will therefore be selected. This is usually not the expected behavior.

[source,cpp]
----
Wrapper<int> w;
Wrapper<int> const cw;
Wrapper<int> w2(cw); // Ok: calls Wrapper(Wrapper const& other)
Wrapper<int> w3(w); // Ill-formed: calls Wrapper(U&& u) with U = Wrapper<int>&
----

> The greediness of forwarding references is a general problem, but it is even more serious for constructors that can be called with a single argument of _forwarding reference_ type

Author: I agree with you. I changed the phrasing a bit in c0bddbc0d16f73026fc76b409de89b609a2fce22. WDYT?

(including variadic template constructors) because in that case, they compete with copy or move constructors.

== How to fix it

The rule reports forwarding constructors without proper constraints if they can be called with a single argument.

> To eliminate this pitfall, add constraints to such constructors so that they are not considered an overload candidate when `U&&` is a reference to the class type

Author: I found the section to be already long, so I only rephrased in a2776ad905a180e8b1d23f95ab65da0717567af8.

In such cases, they compete with copy or move constructors, including those implicitly generated by the compiler.
Yet, selecting the wrong overload can also happen with forwarding references on regular functions and methods, but this is out of scope for this rule.

Even if the non-constrained forwarding constructor may currently seem to work fine, using it with different value categories in the future
could result in unexpected compilation errors or, even worse, hard-to-debug run-time behavior if the wrapped type happens to be
constructible from instances of the wrapper.

== How to fix it

The rule reports forwarding constructors without proper constraints if they can be called with a single argument.
To eliminate this pitfall, add constraints to such constructors so that they are not considered an overload candidate when the argument is
a reference to the class itself. This can be achieved by adding any of the following checks to the forwarding reference constructor:

* a check of the concept `!std::same_as<std::remove_cvref_t<U>, Wrapper>`, or
* a check of type predicate  `!std::is_same_v<std::remove_cvref_t<U>, Wrapper>`, or

> * an `std::enable_if` with the equivalent condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* an `std::enable_if` with the equivalent condition.
```

Author: I removed the full stop yesterday because I learned that the [guideline](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/master/docs/styling_guide.adoc#lists) says we should avoid them in lists. :smile:
WDYT?

Reviewer: I feel this guideline is misleading: from a grammar point of view, we need punctuation here. It would be different for a list of simple items (like a grocery shopping list).

> Note that special care has to be taken when `Wrapper` is a base class. This is explained in more detail in the "Going the extra mile"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that special care has to be taken when `Wrapper` is a base class. This is explained in more detail in "Going the extra mile"
```

below. In this case, those checks would become:

* the concept `!std::derived_from<std::remove_cvref_t<U>, Wrapper>`, or
* a type-predicate `!std::is_base_of_v<Wrapper, std::remove_cvref_t<U>>`, or

> * an `std::enable_if` with the equivalent condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* an `std::enable_if` with the equivalent condition.
```

Author: Same as [this comment](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/pull/2557/files#r1274487244). I can restore them if you think I misinterpreted the guideline here. :smile:

> 

Author: Good catch, fixed in 00e47e4e06e74e30c8e904ce36dab3f17837a78c.

  Wrapper(Wrapper const& other) : value(other.value) {}

  template<typename U>
  Wrapper(U&& u) // Noncompliant: competes with copy constructor
    : value(std::forward<U>(u))
  {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

==== Compliant solution

> 

Author: Addressed in e3cdb5b6118edca98f3b1c035e643db855f6cf0b.

[source,cpp]
----
template<typename T>
class Wrapper {
public:
  Wrapper(Wrapper const& other) : value(other.value) {}
   
  template<typename U>
    requires (!std::same_as<Wrapper, std::remove_cvref_t<U>>)
  Wrapper(U&& u)  // Compliant: no longer competes with copy constructor
    : value(std::forward<U>(u))
  {}

private:
  T value;
};
----

If you can't use {cpp}20 yet, use `std::enable_if` instead:

[source,cpp]
----
template<typename T>
class Wrapper {
public:
  Wrapper(Wrapper const& other) : value(other.value) {}
  
  template<typename U,
    typename std::enable_if<
      !std::is_same<
        Wrapper, 
        typename std::remove_cv<typename std::remove_reference<U>::type>::type
      >::value, 
      int>::type /* Unnamed */ = 0>
  Wrapper(U&& u)  // Compliant: no longer competes with copy constructor
    : value(std::forward<U>(u))
 {} 

private:
  T value;
};
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp]
----
template<typename T>
class OtherWrapper {
public:
  OtherWrapper(OtherWrapper const& other) = default;

  template<typename U>
    requires std::constructible_from<T, U>

>   OtherWrapper(U&& u) // Noncompliant: constructible_from check is not sufficient in general

Author: I added more explanations around examples in e3cdb5b6118edca98f3b1c035e643db855f6cf0b.

----

Then the following would result in a compilation error:

[source,cpp]
----
Derived d("str");
// Note that the constraint is satisfied when T is Derived&
Base b(d);  // Calls the forwarding constructor instead of the usual "slicing" behavior
----

Additionally, subclasses can run into trouble when they try to define their copy constructors:

[source,cpp]
----
class Derived2 : public Base {
  // [...]
public:
  Derived2(Derived2 const& d)
    // d is of Derived2 type and it therefore satisfies the same_as constraint for the forwarding constructor
    : Base(d) {  // Error: Calls the forwarding constructor instead of the base copy constructor
    // [...]
  }
};
----

To avoid these problems, use `std::derived_from` or `std::base_of` checks instead of `std::same_as` or `std::is_same` when the forwarding
constructor belongs to a class that has derived classes.

== Resources

=== Documentation

* CPP reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/forward[`std::forward`]
* CPP reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/overload_resolution#Ranking_of_implicit_conversion_sequences[Ranking of implicit conversion sequences during overload resolution]

> * CPP reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional/optional[`std::optional` constructor]

Reviewer: When looking at the resources section in isolation, it feels a bit weird to have a link to `std::optional`'s ctor. I'd suggest inlining this link when talking about `std::optional` and removing it from here.

```suggestion
```

Author: Good point, I was under the impression we are not allowed to pul external links outside of the "Resources" section, but you are right, a few rules seem to do that... :smile:

};
----

=== Going the extra mile

> When the forwarding constructor belongs to a base class, using the `same_as` constraint check solely is not sufficient. The problem is that
> the forwarding constructor may still get selected when we are copying from a derived object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the forwarding constructor belongs to a base class, using the `same_as` constraint check is not sufficient:
The forwarding constructor can still get selected when we are copying from a derived object.
```

[source,cpp]
----
class Base {
public:
  template <typename T>

>   requires (!std::same_as<std::remove_cvref_t<T>, Base>)  // Bad: same_as is not sufficient for base classes.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why, but "incorrect" sounds less harsh than "bad" to me. Feel free to dismiss the suggestion if you disagree.

```suggestion
  requires (!std::same_as<std::remove_cvref_t<T>, Base>)  // Incorrect: same_as is not sufficient for base classes.
```

  Base(T&& str) : str(std::forward<T>(str)) {}
private:
  std::string str;
};

class Derived : public Base {};
----

> Then the following would result in a compilation error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then the following results in a compilation error:
```

[source,cpp]
----
Derived d("str");
// Note that the constraint is satisfied when T is Derived&
Base b(d);  // Calls the forwarding constructor instead of the usual "slicing" behavior
----

Additionally, subclasses can run into trouble when they try to define their copy constructors:

[source,cpp]
----
class Derived2 : public Base {

>   // [...]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // ...
```

public:
  Derived2(Derived2 const& d)
    // d is of Derived2 type and it therefore satisfies the same_as constraint for the forwarding constructor
    : Base(d) {  // Error: Calls the forwarding constructor instead of the base copy constructor

>     // [...]

Reviewer: We usually use this notation:
```suggestion
    // ...
```
